VisaGuideHN
===========

A handy application that instructs visa applicants how to apply for a non-immigrant visa

From 14 TEGUCIGALPA 428

Summary:  In 2014, the Fraud Prevention Unit (FPU) at Embassy Tegucigalpa launched a smartphone application (app) called “VisaGuide.”  The Spanish-language app teaches non-immigrant visa (NIV) applicants about the visa application process and includes anti-fraud messaging to deter applicants from misrepresentation.  The app can be adapted for use by consulates worldwide.   
 
1.      In Honduras, many visa applicants have trouble understanding how to fill out the DS-160 (Online Nonimmigrant Visa Application), so they pay visa facilitators to do it for them (see reftel).  This opens the door to exploitation and increases the probability of fraud, since local facilitators often have ties to document vending rings.  
2.      The most recent statistics for internet penetration in Honduras, from 2012, show that Honduras has only 1,319,174 internet users—a relatively low number for a country with an estimated population of 8.3 million in that same year (the current population is around 8.5 million).  Mobile-cellular subscribership, however, is roughly 100 per 100 persons, and even those without much technological skill can easily obtain and navigate smartphone apps.  With this in mind, Tegucigalpa’s FPU created the Visaguide app, which leverages smartphone technology to help demystify the visa application process, while proactively fighting fraud.  The more applicants who can tackle the online application themselves, the fewer applicants who will need to rely on unscrupulous visa facilitators.  
3.      The app, designed by a locally-based software developer, walks NIV applicants through the visa application process via an interactive interface that addresses the most commonly-asked questions about the most popular categories of NIV (for tourists, students, mariners, scholars/exchange visitors, and migrant workers).  The app ends with the option to have a custom-made summary of the user’s NIV needs (assessed through yes/no questions) sent to the email account of the user’s choice.  
4.      The app incorporates anti-fraud messaging at key points, such as when applicants are asked if they work.  Given the prevalence of false employment letters presented to consular officers at post, this question carries the following warning, regardless of the applicant’s answer:  “If you lie or present false documents you may be penalized under Honduran law and permanently denied entry into the United States.”  
5.       VisaGuide is available for free on the Android platform at the Google Play Store.  The app can also be viewed via computer at the dedicated website http://www.visaguidehn.com.  Post is also arranging for the deployment of an iPhone version, which will also make the app available in the Apple App Store.  
6.       The FPU ran print ads in newspapers (example below) and used the Embassy’s Facebook and Twitter accounts to promote the app nationwide.  In the first three months of its launch in 2014, VisaGuide was downloaded 792 times, and attracted over 9,000 visitors to Embassy Tegucigalpa’s website.  
 
7.      The table below shows statistics provided by Post’s Visa Call Center.  The numbers demonstrate that before the app was launched, there were many more calls from customers seeking help with the online NIV appointment scheduling process (October-December 2013).  They also reveal a significant decrease in calls for assistance coinciding with the period immediately after the finalized app was advertised (beginning January 2014).  There is a slight difference in the number of total applicants between the two timeframes (147 more, pre-app).
 	Visa applicants	Calls for assistance
October – December 2013	19,596	6,916
January – March 2014	19,449	3,639
 
8.      Tegucigalpa’s “VisaGuide” app is an official source of information for Hondurans who want to apply for non-immigrant visas to vacation, work, or study in the United States.  The app may be copied and customized, and used as an outreach tool to address post-specific application contexts and idiosyncrasies, and/or fraud concerns at any post worldwide.
COMMENT.  Consulates can use complementary technologies—in this case, an NIV smartphone app and social media—to convey and promote consular information and services to the widest audience possible.  Having a variety of deliverables increases a consular section’s overall efficiency, improves customer service, facilitates legitimate work and study in the United States, and helps boost U.S. tourism—all of which in turn contribute to Consular Affairs’ active participation in the Quadrennial Diplomacy and Development Review. 
